Contrib (#251)
stfc/janus-core: contributing.md

git clone git@github.com:stfc/janus-core.git janus-core-stfc
```

A *fork* is created using the web UI. It may then be cloned for a user
called 'username' as follows,

``` sh
git clone git@github.com:username/janus-core.git janus-core-username
```

### Branch, fix, merge model:

All work should follow the workflow of branch, fix, merge. Let us assume
you have an issue with your code which needs to be fixed.

#### Step 1: Branch from your fork

Create a new branch for the issue on the dashboard of your fork, we will
assume the branch is called 'issueXYZ'. Clone the branch,

``` sh
$ git clone -b issueXYZ --single-branch git@github.com:username/janus-core.git janus-issueXYZ
```

Alternatively you can create the branch in the cli using

``` sh
# clone the repository, if you already have a local repository this is not nessecary
$ git clone git@github.com:username/janus-core.git janus-issueXYZ
$ pushd janus-issueXYZ
# create and checkout a new branch (this is equivilent to git branch followed by git checkout)
$ git checkout -b issueXYZ
# create a remote tracking branch for you to push your changes to
$ git push -u origin issueXYZ
```

#### Step 2: Fix the issue and commit your changes

> Fix whatever is wrong. Use git status to see which files you have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fix whatever is wrong. Use `git status` to see which files you have
```

assign a reviewer. Compare the code and if you are happy click to submit your pull request.

After the pull request has been submitted tests will be run and your
reviewer will be notified.

#### Step 3b: Finalising the merge

If all is OK with the commit your reviewer may set the request to be
merged once all tests pass. Otherwise the reviewer may open discussions
using the Github comment system to point out issues that may need to be
addressed before the commit can be merged.

If changes need to be made you may make more commits onto your branch.
When you push your branch to your *fork* the pull request will be
automatically updated to use the latest commit. Reply to the discussions
to indicate when and how they have been addressed.

If your branch has become out of sync with *upstream* then conflicts may
arise. Sometimes these cannot be automatically resolved and you will
need to resolve them by hand. Github provides instructions for this, or
you can follow this routine,

``` sh
# add upstream as a remote if you have not already
$ git remote add upstream git@github.com:stfc/janus-core.git
# get the changes to upstream since you started working on your issue
$ git fetch upstream

> # merge these changes into your branch (assuming you want to merge into the master branch on devel)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# merge these changes into your branch (assuming you want to merge into the main branch on devel)
```
Also not sure `devel` has been introduced at this point? I can also imagine people might think it's a branch name, since it's not uncommon.

$ git merge upstream/main
# resolve any conflicts
# push to your fork
$ git push
```

Alternatively you may use rebase which will replay the changes you made
in your branch on top of *upstream/main* however be sure you understand
the differences between merge and rebase

``` sh
# add upstream as a remote if you have not already
$ git remote add upstream git@github.com:stfc/janus-core.git
# get the changes to upstream since you started working on your issue

> $ git fetch devel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ git fetch upstream
```

> # merge these changes into your branch (assuming you want to merge into the master branch on devel)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# merge these changes into your branch (assuming you want to merge into the main branch on devel)
```

$ git rebase -i upstream/main
# resolve any conflicts
# push to your fork
$ git push
```

### Advanced git

#### Keeping your fork in sync with project

By adding two remotes, one for *devel* and one for your *fork* it is
possible to keep your *fork* in sync with *devel*. This will greatly
simplify merge requests.

``` sh
# clone your fork
$ git clone git@github.com:username/janus-core.git janus-core-username
pushd janus-core-username
# add a remote for upstream
$ git remote add upstream git@github.com:stfc/janus-core.git
```

These commands need to be done only once. `git remote -v` shall show you
the origin and project fetch and push links

``` sh
$ git remote -v
origin  git@github.com:username/janus-core.git (fetch)
origin  git@github.com:username/janus-core.git (push)
devel git@github.com:stfc/janus-core.git (fetch)
devel git@github.com:stfc/janus-core.git (push)
```

When you need to sync your *fork* with *devel*, do the following,

``` sh
# get the latest commits from upstream
$ git fetch upstream

> # ensure you are in the master branch of your fork

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# ensure you are in the main branch of your fork
```

- Documentation: adding or enhancing documentation

## Review

All merge requests will be reviewed to ensure the integrity of the code.

The reviewer(s) have the following responsibilities:

- Ensuring all contribution rules have been followed
- Ensuring the [coding style](./coding_style.md) is adhered to
- Only accepting a merge if all tests have passed
- Using the comments system to request changes for the submittor to make

### Enforcing style

GitHub Actions will automatically run a pre-commit and enforce the coding style.
To reduce the number of CI failures, please run the pre-commit locally before
you push to your repository.

```sh
   pre-commit run --all-files
```

## Using git for development

The Github instance hosts an *upstream* repository, which we will refer to
as *upstream*. Contributors will work on their own personal copies of the
repository by creating *forks*. This allows us to keep *upstream* clean
(one commit per merge request, if possible, all commits passing tests)
while users may work on their own *fork*, creating commits and changing
the code as they see fit. Only in exceptional circumstances branches are allowed in *upstream*,

> chat in zulip channel about them before you push any.

Author: we shall create a public channel in which we will hang for user support

pushd janus-core-username
# add a remote for upstream
$ git remote add upstream git@github.com:stfc/janus-core.git
```

These commands need to be done only once. `git remote -v` shall show you
the origin and project fetch and push links

``` sh
$ git remote -v
origin  git@github.com:username/janus-core.git (fetch)
origin  git@github.com:username/janus-core.git (push)
upstream git@github.com:stfc/janus-core.git (fetch)
upstream git@github.com:stfc/janus-core.git (push)
```

When you need to sync your *fork* with *upstream*, do the following,

``` sh
# get the latest commits from upstream
$ git fetch upstream
# ensure you are in the main branch of your fork
$ git checkout main
# merge your main branch into the main branch of upstream
$ git merge upstream/main
# push these changes back to the remote of your fork (origin)
$ git push
```

of course one can use a similar process to merge any other branch or
available projects.

#### Rebasing commits

When working on an issue you may use multiple commits. When you are
ready to create a merge request, you should squash your changes into one
commit in order to keep *upstream* clean. This is most easily achieved with

> an interactive rebase.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to recommend this? Before/during review, my preference is generally squash minor commits, but keep some separation of more substantial changes, which I find makes it easier to review, as long as we squash down on merging with main.

Reviewer: Also "Squash and Merge" is a perfectly valid way of doing it.

Author: I suggest it mainly to force people to have modular reviews with one and only one feature in. I know can be overhead, but once you need to debug pays off.

# Contribution workflow and the review process

This document outlines the best practice, using git and CI, which
**must** be followed for all contributions to janus-core. Also contained
are instructions and tips for managing your fork of the project which
will help keep merges clean and avoid many headaches.

## Golden rules

In brief the rules for contribution are as follows:

-   Follow the branch, fix, merge model, from your own fork or fork/branch model.
-   An issue must be created for every piece of work (bug, feature,
    *etc.*)
-   Pull/merge requests will not be accepted without a review
-   New features must have a test
-   All tests must pass, no regressions may be merged

## Issues

### Using issues

-   Open an issue for each piece of work done.
-   Open issues for design discussions. The answers may be important for
    newer members.

> -   New features, *e.g.* add new MLIP, comments should be used to
>     provide succint reports on progress.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   When adding features, *e.g.* a new MLIP, use comments to provide succinct reports on progress.
```

Reviewer 2: Yep, just didn't really seem long enough to split it into two in this case when I was rewording it, which was the main point, happy for it to be two still.

Also yes, I previously was getting rid of the extra spaces, but I'd rather be consistent and didn't want to change all of them...

### Labels

> Labels may be assigned to issues to help classify them. Examples
> include,
> 
> -   Testing: as in testing the water. This label should be attached to experimental developments.
> -   Bug: something is not working as expected. We typically aim to fix these ASAP
> -   Design: queries or suggestions about the structure of the program
> -   Enhancement: adding or improving on features
> - Documentation: adding or enhancing documentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Labels may be assigned to issues to help classify them. Examples include:

-   Bug: something is not working as expected. We typically aim to fix these ASAP
-   Enhancement: adding or improving on features
-   Testing: adding or enhancing unit testing or CI
-   Documentation: adding or enhancing documentation
-   Question: Something is unclear
```
